Draft content for Service Worker & Offline (#658)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/progressive-web-apps-chromium/offline.md

---
title: Handle offline and network instability scenarios with the Cache API, Service Worker, and friends
description: There are a host of technologies that enable you to create more resilient experience in the face of uncertain network conditions.
author: MSEdgeTeam
ms.author: msedgedevrel
ms.date: 05/11/2020
ms.topic: article
ms.prod: microsoft-edge
ms.technology: pwa
keywords: progressive web apps, PWA, Edge, JavaScript, Windows, UWP, Microsoft Store
---

# Handle Offline And Network Instability Scenarios With The Cache API, Service Worker, And Friends  

For many years organizations were reluctant to invest heavily in web-based software over native software because of the dependence of the web on a stable network connection.  Thankfully, that limitation of the web is no longer the barrier it once was.  The web platform now offers a handful of robust options for enabling a user to continue working, even if the network connection becomes unstable or goes down entirely.  

> ## The Cache API  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use the caching to improve performance of PWAs
```

                            return cache.put( request, response );
                        });
                    );
                    return response;
                })
                // fallback to offline page
                .catch(() => caches.match( "/offline/" ));
            })
        ); // end respondWith
    } // end if HTML
});
```  

The previous code runs within the Service Worker whenever the browser makes a `Fetch` request for this site.  Within that event, there is a conditional that only runs if the request is for an HTML file.  If it is, the Service Worker checks to see if the file already exists in any cache \(using the `match()` method\).  If the request exists in the cache, that cached result is returned.  If not, a new `Fetch` for that resource is run, a copy of the response is cached for later, and the response is returned.  If the `Fetch` fails, the offline page is returned from the cache.  

Every PWA is different and each likely has a unique caching strategy, these are just a simple introduction.  Chances are your code looks much different, you may even have different caching strategies for different routes within the same application too!  

> ## IndexedDB  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Use IndexedDB in your PWA to store structured data
```

`IndexedDB` is a low-level API for storing structured data.  Like the `Cache` API, it is also asynchronous meaning you may use it in the main thread as well as within Web Workers like Service Worker.  The `IndexedDB` API is typically the tool for when you need to store a significant amount of structured data on the client.  You may also use `IndexedDB` to store binary data, such as encrypted media objects.  

The `IndexedDB` API is too complicated to walk you through quickly.  For more information about the basics, see [MDN primer on using IndexedDB][MDNIndexeddbApiUsing].  

> ## Web Storage  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Understand storage options for PWAs
```

Heavy usage may create performance issues for your application.  

Web Storage comes in two flavors: `localStorage` and `sessionStorage`.  Each is maintained as a separate data store isolated to the domain that created it.  As you may expect, `sessionStorage` persists only for the duration of the browsing session \(for example, while the browser is open, inclusive of refresh and restore\); whereas `localStorage` persists until it is removed by the developer, the user, or the browser \(when under storage pressure\).  The API is identical for both storage types.  

```javascript
var data = {
    title: document.querySelector("[property='og:title']").getAttribute("content"),
    description: document.querySelector( "meta[name='description']" ).getAttribute("content")
};
localStorage.setItem( window.location, JSON.stringify(data) );
```  

This basic code sample grab metadata about the current page and store it in a JavaScript object.  Then it stores that value as JSON in `localStorage` \(using `setItem()` method\), assigned to a key equal to the current `window.location` URL.  You may retrieve the information from `localStorage` by using `getItem()` method.  

> An excerpt from an offline page that enumerates cached pages and extracts that metadata to build a rich link list.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code snippet shows how to use caching with `localstorage` to enumerate cached pages and extract metadata to perform a task, such as building a list of links.
```

```javascript
caches.open( "pages" )
      .then( cache => {
    cache.keys()
         .then( keys => {
        if ( keys.length )
        {
            keys.forEach( insertOfflineLink );
        }
    })
});

function insertOfflineLink( request ) {
    var data = JSON.parse( localStorage.getItem( request.url ) );
    // if data exists and it is not the offline page
    if ( data && request.url.indexOf('offline') < 0  )
    {
        // build a link and insert it into the page
    }
}
```  

> Here, the `insertOfflineLink()` method passes the URL of the request into the `localStorage.getItem()` method to retrieve any stored metadata that may be stored when the page is viewed.  If that data is found, the method builds it and inserts the requisite markup to display it.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `insertOfflineLink()` method passes the URL of the request into the `localStorage.getItem()` method to retrieve any stored metadata. The retrieved data is checked to see if it exists, and if it does, an action can be taken on the data, such as building and inserting the markup to display it.
```

> ## Network Information  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Test for network connections in your PWA
```

> In addition to being able to store information for offline use, you may find it quite helpful to know when a network connection is available in order to synchronize data or even inform each of your users that the network status has changed.  There are a few options for getting the information you need in this regard.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to storing information for offline use, it is helpful to know when a network connection is available in order to synchronize data or inform users that the network status has changed. Use the following options to test for network connectivity.
```

### navigator.onLine  

> The `navigator.onLine` property is a simple boolean that lets you know the current status of the network.  If the value is set to `true`, the user is online; if the value is set to `false`, the user is offline.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `navigator.onLine` property is a boolean that lets you know the current status of the network. If the value is `true`, the user is online, otherwise the user is offline.
```

### Online and Offline Events  

> Knowing whether the network is available at any given time is helpful, but only to a point.  More often than not, you want to know when things change.  To cover that, you may listen and react to network events implemented by the browser.  The events are available on the `window`, `document`, and `document.body` elements as displayed in the following code.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Knowing whether the network is available is helpful, but you may want to take action  when your network connectivity changes. In this situation, you may want to listen and take action in response to network events. The events are available on the `window`, `document`, and `document.body` elements as displayed in the following code snippet.
```

```javascript
window.addEventListener("online",  function(){

>     console.log("You are back online!");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    console.log("You are online!");
```

});
window.addEventListener("offline", function(){

>     console.log("Oh no, you lost your network connection :-(");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    console.log("Oh no, you lost your network connection.");
```

});
```  

## See also  

To learn more about managing offline scenarios, see the following pages.  

*   [Cache][MDNCache]  
*   [IndexedDB][MDNIndexeddbApi]  
*   [Service Worker][MDNServiceWorker]  
*   [Web Storage][MDNWebStorageApi]  
*   [navigator.onLine][MDNNavigatoronline]  
*   [Online and Offline Events][MDNNavigatoronlineOfflineEvents]  

> 
> The following publications are also useful for the topic.  
> 
> *   [Going Offline][AbookapartGoingOffline] by Jeremy Keith  

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

Author: 😢

> *   [Request with Intent: Caching Strategies in the Age of PWAs][AlistapartRequestIntentCachingStrategiesAgePwas] by Aaron Gustafson  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   [Request with Intent: Caching Strategies in the Age of PWAs][AlistapartRequestIntentCachingStrategiesAgePwas]
```

Author: 😢
